This episode of surprisingly awesome is brought to you by Casper Casper mattresses combining two
technologies latex foam and memory foam they are obsessive Lee
engineered mattresses at a fraction of the
price plus Casper has a risk free trial and return policy. Try sleeping on
a Casper for one hundred days with free delivery and painless
returns fifty dollars toward any mattress purchased now by visiting Casper
dot com slash awesome and using the promo code awesome at check
out terms and conditions apply.
Hey John. Oh hey Adam. Hey. So explain to me what
your status is with Delta
Airlines. Oh I am a Delta
diamond medallion
status. Very impressive because I I have spent
a not insignificant amount of the last several years. Craving
and finally achieving Delta platinum medallion status. Oh your
platinum which has you know all too well is one with one very big level
below diamond
and so I don't even know why I'm talking to you right now goodbye.
From
gimlet media this is surprisingly awesome. I'm Adam Davidson and
our co-host Adam McKay will be back soon. But this
week we have a very special guest host a man who is a friend of both
the Adams Mr John Hodgman thanks for doing the show Jon It's my pleasure. And I'm
glad to break up the monopoly Adams have had over the show for so
long we should say I'm
sure you need no introduction but you host the phenomenal Judge John Hodgman that
is a great pod cast thank you very much you have been a regular on The Daily. Show
in those famous ads. I'm a Mac. I'm a P.C. you're the P.C.
I was and in my heart still am. If anyone at Apple is listening I'm I'm in wardrobe and ready to go
back to work.
So you and I were talking about hey what should we do what's a topic that we could do for surprisingly Hobson
And remarkably quickly you and I realize that we are both
obsessed with this topic of frequent flyer programs
yes. And not just the programs themselves but the
imaginary status levels that the airlines confer
upon people who travel quite a lot for work
or for chasing status level.
So I think you and I have the same question.
Yeah that is implicit in everything we're saying which is. Are you and
I suckers are we being played by these airlines dangling their
imaginary medallions in front of us.
I don't think that we actually do have the same question that the question is are we suckers I know the answer
yes question answered I profoundly believe that I have been
manipulated into playing this abstract video
game. And the real question for me is why do I still do it even though I
know that I'm being played do you truly
believe that by chasing an imaginary
medallion of status that you are making a rational decision that
accrues benefit to
you ARE a job. Maybe you think we're morons maybe you could just easily dismiss it
and I want to disagree with you so strongly it
is central to how I see the world.
In fact I think most people who study economics for a living believe
that on some level human beings are much of the time most of the time
quite rational but
I will agree that frequent flyer miles. Really
challenges that belief. And my fear is that frequent flyer miles
and my
own and many other people's unhealthy obsession with this
bizarre arbitrary symbol of status might just prove that we're
not all that rational that you might be right that we are a bunch of morons.
Of course. So let's get down to the evidence in the trial of the century
are human beings rational or irrational. Here's exhibit
A Many people call me the putting guy they call you the putting guy.
I figured out a way to use chocolate putting to travel the world.
All right you have my attention.
This is Dave Phillips when he's not being called the putting guy he's an engineer at
the University of California.
So this story happened about seventeen years ago and Dave Phillips saw that healthy choice.
They're having a promotion buy any of their products send in a barcode
and you get a hundred frequent flyer miles one barcode so do it for one hundred miles
on one of four airlines you could
choose so he went out and bought one of every healthy choice product he could find he
bought chicken teriyaki dinner bean and ham
soup in my quest I realize you know some of these products are less expensive
than other and I'm still you know I'm an engineer
or I'm trying to figure out you know what's the sweet spot for this promotion
and I went to another store which was one of these grocery outlet type stores.
Sure and. I saw a
display little display case with
individual cups of chocolate pudding like trial size
putting cups also by healthy choice. Each one had its
own barcode. Each cup each got twenty five cents.
For a couple put an
ad is on barcode you get one hundred trick on flyer miles and I grab the entire
display and the putting them through it all in the box.
And your heart pounding Is this like whoa this
is yeah this is embarrassing but I was actually pretty excited I'm doing the
little calculation of my head and I'm realizing well this is a trip to Europe for one hundred dollars where the
putting the second he sees those puttings the game changes completely he buys all
the putting in the
store and when you go to the the
cashier at that first one I didn't really have a good answer but I
developed one as I as I moved on from store to
store and so let's just do a little role play. I'm a cashier
at a grocery outlet Yeah that's a lot of putting sir.
Why are you buying so
much I have to preface this and tell you I remind you this was one thousand nine hundred nine.
So let's let's let's go through it again now you can ask
me why is there some mad about you reference are going to drop or something
Seinfeld reference. All right here we go I'm going to get back into ninety nine and
you're right a very twenty first century accent. You know you talk different yeah. What's the
deal with all the flooding in your
cart
Y2K
Oh.
Wow
that and I hate to use this adjective in a putting related
discussion
smooths so I live in Davis. I happen at my mother in law with us
that week who lives in Fresno That's about two hundred miles away. I loaded my mother in law
in the minivan and we hit every grocery outlet
store between Davis and Fresno.
And what's your mother in law thing throughout all
this she was she's a very make elderly lady who didn't know
what to make of it but she she played along.
Well why was she even along for the ride she's taking up valuable putting space.
I needed some help with the cart. So she actually did help me under under cover of
darkness I would unload the putting into the
garage because you. You know what your neighbors to see it. Yeah I thought in a way where Gee. Yeah I
think you know it was a good thought you had Yeah.
Then we would we had to get the barcode off the putting So it's this
P. process of peeling the sticky label off of the putting and collecting
all of those to make your mother in law do that
too I think everybody had a try at it and the kids the
kids kind of cooperated for a couple days and then their
finger started hurting elder abuse and child labor was.
So that's where I had to make you and your
kids do this until their hands were hurting.
Yeah I mean it was two nights I got pretty fast at doing it but I
realize there was a there was a deadline for sending an all these bar codes and I realize
I'm probably not going to make it with just me doing A and then I saw this problem of what do I do
with all this
putting right. So what did you do with
it I ended up calling some local food
banks and after a few calls I actually found someone with a good sense of humor at
a local Salvation Army who said Sure there's a there was a
little bit of a catch I tell my all this putting and you're free to use
a you know I'm happy to donate it to you but when you're done I'd like to get the
barcode back.
You've got the charitable organization to give you free labor even worse the
volunteers who said you know what honey this weekend I'd really like to help the homeless that's right I want to do something good for
my community. Oh well I got a better idea. There is that engineer at University of
California who really want to go to Paris.
You'll have carpal tunnel at the
end but at least. A guy gets to go to
Paris you make it sound so bad it was it was funny at the time.
No doubt about trying to be it's funny now too.
It's
fantastic. So in the end. Days
bought twelve thousand one hundred fifty cups of chocolate
pudding and if you have a calculator nearby you. That translates to
one point
two million miles and he traveled for free on the
miles for the next decade. And if you have a calculator nearby you know that means
ten years.
So give us what were some of the best trips you took how many trips do you think you took with this.
She's done dozens of trips we did we did family trips we
did one trip to Mexico where seven of us in our family all went to Mexico on frequent flyer miles.
My wife and I flew to Marash a sub the coast of Africa.
I you know I flew colleagues around the world just for silly
silly little adventures it really was an amazing kind of life changing event and in many
ways. And where did you fly your mother in
law my mother alive
think got she got New England.
Sir I'm from New England. That's no
present she does not like
flying just give me a quick if you did the ballpark the amount of time you
personally invested.
It was it was it. It was easily one hundred
hours hundred hours so yeah you know less than three weeks worth of a full
time job and the
money and the money a nationally it was a little over three thousand
dollars and why do you say initially did you
invest more. There was actually a kind of a an afterthought to all of
this I shivered. Since I actually did donate all of the putting to the
Salvation Army. I claimed all of that as
a charitable
donation.
And how did that go with the I.R.S. did you claim through all three thousand.
Yeah Dave is now a legend in the frequent flyer
community and I guess John it's worth pointing out there is such a thing. Frequent Flyer
community they go to conferences and he just goes by the putting
guy that's on his name tag and people stare at him in wonder
and envy. He's got status now. He earned a diamond medallion of his own
making I love how that story starts out. He is a total
sucker healthy choice had him jest where they wanted him. They were sitting in some office saying how do we get
people to more of our frozen dinners. Let's give away some little Miles.
But then he turns it around and finds a putting and healthy choice became the sucker.
So that's the plot twist healthy choice didn't see Davy putting hoarder common but here's the thing.
It's not just all the choice. We're all suckers right because he got a tax rebate for
the American taxpayers paid for his unhealthy and I would say
irrational obsession with showing up healthy
choice but from an economic standpoint there is no question this guy was
wildly rational only rational to
see footing that you can buy for twenty five cents and get one hundred miles which were valued at the time
at around two dollars that's raised a pile of money sitting there inputting form.
I'm just going to interrupt you to say that under your technical definition of
rational a man with a garage full of putting is a rational being explain that
to me from my technical definition of rational
every human being who walked by that putting and didn't buy a garage full of
it they are being irrational. It is actually that is the
mystery. I have a piece of counter evidence that suggests that we are in
fact irrational. In these decisions I have a story about a person
who behaved completely irrationally. And I'm speaking of course of
myself Exhibit B. Why.
I was platinum medallion because of all the travel that I have been doing for this T.V. show that
I've been on and going on toward the end of last year. I
saw on my scoreboard. That is the app for
this
airline that I was seven thousand medallion qualifying
miles away from
Diamond. And I knew that I had to get there by the end of the
year and I knew that I would need to fly back and forth across the country in first class.
I had commitments here and the
holidays and it was you know I really only had you know today. I think I could maybe
go and do a single overnight in Los Angeles but realistically I would have to just fly
across the
country and come back and I would have to pay for that trip to like and that would have to be
a first class ticket so that was going to be three thousand dollars and I wasn't even getting twelve
thousand putting cups out of it you know and I mean I had really worthwhile I was going to get I was going to get an
imaginary medallion. A diamond medallion I just want to say yeah it's
imaginary Diamond a man are going to write an area down
yet my finger hovered over the trackpad of
my computer I could have just bought it is like Are you ready to complete this
purchase and well I thought about what it would
be like to
be to be on the plane you know. I
thought
about saying goodbye to my son that morning.
Because it was very traumatic for my family so I imagine you know looking in the eyes
and saying well I got to I got to go fly to Los Angeles I won't be here when you get home from school and he'll be
like Condor stand you have to go for work and I'm
like well not this time. Not this time to know
Jeff I think a fly across the country to get an imaginary medallion But you understand
son you're a gamer right. You know you know what levelling up is all about let me show you this screen you see how
the bars almost all
the way did other place. I got to go eat this power dot that's going to turn me into the big Pac-Man that's going to
allow me to eat the ghosts of my own self hatred for one
year. And then I imagine myself on the
plane and what it would feel. To get up that morning and leave and
go just sit on a plane for no other reason and spend all of that
money that good money. To chase an imaginary medallion like what I
feel good about myself to fly across the
country and then landed L.A.X. and then what have
a couple hours to kill go over to the IN and OUT AT THE AIRPORT have a bubble double Animal
Style Watch the big planes
land for an hour then take go back go through the delta super
special first class entrance go up there silver elevator to their private security
line get back on the plane fly
back maybe watch Mad Max Fury wrote a couple times and drink a lot of free whiskey and I realize that probably the
best day of my life.
All right so what happened.
A kind of miracle happened. I couldn't quite bring myself to press the button and buy the ticket
I decide I was going to sleep on it.
And in the morning I was going through my email and I found an email that I don't most forgotten about
which was a request from a public radio show in Portland Oregon Live Wire hosted
by Luke Burbank saying Could I come out in a
week to be a guest on the show because their previous guest had dropped
out and immediately I saw my chance and I said I will come
out if you fly me on this specific flight.
And they said first class and I said yes and I said well we don't have a lot of.
Budget for this and I said I'm hanging up now and they said OK I believe them into
it so wait you think that story explains that you were irrational. That
was incredibly rational you sat there you truly had a period
of wrestling with the benefit of this elite status comparing it to three
thousand dollars comparing it to other things you value in your life. And
then you realize there is a way to change the cost benefit
ratio by making Luke Burbank take money out of
his wallet and give it to you to fly you for. Class you were
being
completely rational and you know what I did when I got on that radio show in front of a live studio audience to
be interviewed by Luke what it did I just talked about my medallion
status and I rubbed it in their
faces and said I'm only Here's what I could give him a
medallion
coming
up after the break we need who helped invent frequent flyer
program.
Hey Adam it's not. Hey nice name. What you guys were about to go
to a break.
I wanted to give people a heads up that I'm going to be reading some of your ads for a
while not all the ads just some of the ads. That's fine with me they get
away. And this episode of surprisingly awesome
is brought to you by Ford Motor Company that iconic Ford to
chime engineers at Ford spend lots of time
and energy coming up with that Jennifer Prescott. Vehicle harmony supervisor.
Can you sing the Ford
chime What is that
sound supposed to convey. That's the informational tone. You know nothing's wrong here
but we'd like to point your attention somewhere and then there's a version of it that says
hey I want your attention. It's more
that Jennifer thinks constantly about how a Ford
sounds every tone every chime every B. and I do
mean
constantly you go in the grocery store I don't know how those clerks two words as they take each item in
spite said you know it beats and sometimes it double the it's all I asked them why did it doubled
you ask the clerk at the grocery store
about the big. Oh yeah I can't help but ask any time the bee pattern changes
like what it's communicating and I do get. Johnny Lux and I kind of explained last kind of what I do for
a living and meanwhile like there's someone behind you with like a carton of eggs
and Midwestern How can I put that I'm going to check out my
many Ford making the world a more
harmonious place one beep at a time. Go to ford dot com to learn
more this episode of surprisingly awesome is brought to you
by Squarespace the easiest way to build a beautiful website portfolio or
online store. Lisa last row is a loyal Squarespace customer and owner of
Lazarou antiques and interior
design her business is all about timeless beauty but as Lisa explain to
our producer Rachel Ward interior design is not the only service she provides her clients.
You need to be as much of a psychiatry's as you are now and your designer really.
Yes you need to make the clients feel that they made the choice.
Do you ever find clients fighting you on some of the things that you've proposed for
them to have or not because I am sightings now I have
no clients of my own volition.
Maybe it will be fine for them to know that about them
maybe Squarespace for interior designers who double as an
official therapist and for all the rest of us start your free trials like today add
squarespace dot com and make sure to use the offer code awesome to get ten percent off
your first purchase Squarespace build it beautiful.
This
is surprisingly awesome. I'm Adam Davidson and this week we are joined by John
Hodgman Delta diamond medallion status holder. John Hodgman is my full
title thank you very much. Oh man I'm so jealous and we are trying to decide
if our obsession with frequent flyer miles is rational or a huge waste of
time more than a waste of time these programs. Pull families
apart it empties out thank you. Count's it makes you do things that you
feel ashamed of
later to get an answer to What are these things these frequent flyer miles programs we
had to go to the source.
We had to understand the history of them and so to Lila Holt our fabulous
producer found one of the guys who helped invent
them to bring me back so it's you're the C.F.O. of what
was American at the time was that the largest airline or
just no evidence no or no. As an American was in deep
trouble American has like the six. Well I just USA I
was in one hundred seventy eight we hadn't made any money for a very long time.
Its market share in the US was less than ten percent.
This is Bob Crandall he was the C.F.O. of American Airlines back then later he became its
longtime
C.E.O. And John you and I are the same age. I don't think we really remember this
but before one thousand nine hundred eighty eight. It's it's sort of crazy but the airline industry
was completely controlled by government officials they decided what
routes airlines could fly. They decided how much the airlines
could charge. It wasn't a free market in any way and it's hard to imagine now.
But even harder to imagine what it must've been like in one thousand nine hundred eighty eight when all the sudden with very little
notice the government deregulated and they said airlines fly wherever you want charge whatever you
want and they had to create a whole new business
model is this too strong I mean I was saying it almost feels like the fall of the Soviet Union
or something that that you're going to from this centrally current Trold economy
to a more wild free market economy didn't feel
like that yeah I don't know that I don't know that I characterize it and political ties
that fact it certainly is fair to characterize it as a very profound
change but it felt huge. Oh it not only did it feel huge it was
huge
church like you're in a different business. The next
a totally different business. It was clear that what we now had.
It's
a much more aggressive much wider
ranging business and there were lots of airlines. So we said well you know why
why should anybody choose rather than they have a guy.
Every time he or she flies that's what we want we want them to choose
us every time that Farai. How do you do
that so we hit on the idea of awarding
people a prizes which were an accumulating prize and we said
well what's the prize that people want.
And if every piece of market research that we did then hair or have
done
sense is that people like travel better than any other
award and of course we're in the travel business so we therefore stumbled upon
the idea of frequent flyer
miles in the most brilliant thing we did was we use the reservation system to
keep track of it so you didn't have to you didn't have to stick. You
know coupons in a book we just we kept track of it for
you so I see Phil like you at first you're like wait we want to give people a little prize maybe it'll be a
toaster Maybe though get a set of World Book Encyclopedia and then you realize what wait
the thing people want whether it's a bank or whoever is offering the
prizes travel and we happen to know a lot about travel.
That's exactly right. Do you remember where what was going on at the time that was comparable to airline
miles was
it has an age range stands what R S N A I'm too young.
Back in the day there was a company called S N H. And they
they hand and they handed out Green
Stamps grocery stores used them. It was primarily a grocery store product as I
remember we had some conversations with one of those women you know if we can if we really
make this thing work if this really works maybe we will replace Green Stamps.
They did replace Green Stamps American Airlines started their frequent flyer program advantage.
A week later. United Airlines started one than soon Delta
T.W.A. Southwest Airlines actually held out for a while because they said as just a marketing gimmick
but eventually when people stop flying on their planes they said OK we'll start one
two by one thousand nine hundred five Diners Club becomes the first credit card
to be part of an airline loyalty
program and. Of course it all ends up exactly as Bob Crandall fought it would There is
now like this shadow economy built on miles and points and awards
that exist. Alongside our regular one of dollars and euros and yen.
Like now when I use my credit card and. I hope you don't hang up the phone when I tell you this
my Delta credit card.
And
I you know I go grocery shopping and i'm thing about the miles I get
the airline miles.
Well that's right. Of course F.N. that that's what we want to do. I mean that was it that
was the whole idea.
We talked to one economist who has made it her life's career to study these programs and she said
they worked great for the airlines that it has been proven over and over that when
people join one of these loyalty programs they do indeed become a lot more
loyal to that airline. But what about us what about you and me what are we as
consumers getting out of it after all these hours of collecting putting How can I maximize the profitability.
So I can believe that I'm actually making my own decisions and not just be manipulated by
companies expect that is exactly what I wanted to do because I had in my head. There's
some secret there's some something if we do enough reporting. We will
find out how to maximize frequent flyer programs you want to hear
the secret.
Yeah I do what is the secret. All right here's a secret.
There's no one secret. There are a million secrets and most of them are not
really secrets they're just annoying details
that each airline has about their particular program that they can change whenever they feel like
it like you know that thing about fair code. Yeah like
fair code A and then P. or G. and D. right. Z.-E. and like they're
never they can just be a B. C. D. E. F. right it has to be random letters from the alphabet
to keep you confused and they all have different rules about how many bonus miles you get depending on the code
and everything else. Yeah I
mean to truly understand frequent flyer programs. It would be like a part time
job maybe a full time job. There's all these blogs the Points Guy one mile at a
time view from the wing million mile secrets to help you figure out how
to exploit frequent flyer mile
programs and most of what they list is just hey Delta has a new credit card that has twenty
thousand mile bonus only available for the next three months that kind of thing but they're
constantly changing what the rules are so these guys are constantly updating people.
Yes but there's a cost associated with finding all these loopholes it takes time it becomes as you say
a partner full time job for some people are they really rational for doing that.
Well actually let's get into the actual intellectual debate that you and I are having that
are the terms of this debate for me. Are behavioral
versus rational.
So let's define our terms very carefully here because this all hinges on an economic definition
of rational in which it is rational to fill your garage with putting
and behavioral in this context I don't know what it means at all so you tell me Planet Money.
OK fair enough. Yes so this might be the most obnoxious thing
I've said on the radio but I'm going to say it. I hate talking about the rational versus behavioral
economics debate with with lay people with people have not been trained in economic law for
I'm so sorry excuse me all these right away Oh I apologize. I just want to remind you
diamond medallion status I think I've earned this very brief economics lesson
from you it's on the back of
my card I get one error free. So I think in popular terms.
Everyone's obviously like oh well the rational school doesn't make sense I've actually met human beings and I've
had the observation that they are not in any. A rational right.
But the rational school is more like wow people are nuts. Yes.
Over time and on average the nothingness kind of averages out in
the long form scatter graph of behavior. The arc
of madness bends to rational think that has a beautiful way to put it
this actually has big implications because if you
believe my God is going to be a big idea. Can't we just do a podcast.
All right let's hear a thing about OK in the video right judgments are right this is the this is
why for presently and we reach for something so I stand there make life different this is this is
why why Gimblet has a beautiful studio and tons of
listeners and why all the other pod cast that I
do are just dude's talking on Skype.
About movies Exactly. Now. All right all right. They don't have big ideas I'm ready don't already I'd already
gotten is that where the money I'm ready to level up.
OK so the rational School of Economics holds and people figure stuff out on their own
they decide what it is worth spending money on what is
worth worrying about but over the last thirty years there's
this other school it's a younger school the behavioral School of
Economics which holds that people are manipulable
they don't
make always the best choices especially about. Calculating their long term
benefits
and generally well I like the behavior of school and I don't reject it I
do generally think that the rational school explains a lot of behavior explains a lot of
my
behavior and this area and I've thought about
this quite a bit over the years this area of frequent flyer miles
is this part of my life where I'm like oh maybe I'm totally wrong.
But in this journey as I learn more and more I came to
a conclusion that actually shocked me and also delighted me which is this.
I think I'm really rational about this I did the math.
As far as I can tell I spend somewhere between two and three thousand dollars more each
year so that I can have platinum status but
I decided when I looked at those numbers like I travel enough
that it is
words between two and three thousand dollars to me to be able to board the plane first and
not stand in long lines to be able to use the Delta lounge to get upgraded to first
class for free from time to time so
I'm being rational. It sounds to me like you're redefining the you're
redefining rationality so that you can claim that you're rational. Now here's the thing I don't I don't think
you're telling the truth because if you were offered from Delta the chance to get all these perks.
If you just give them two thousand
dollars means you may do it but you love the game you love you love earning them this
is better than just buying status you you've earned it. You love the status.
You're absolutely right. There's no question. I love looking at someone's gold or
silver medallion and thinking I'm platinum and I like looking at
my Delta
app and seeing the little green line go closer and closer to my next status level
but my
point is all of that all that status stuff is just
extra that's just there I say it. The putting at
the end of a delicious meal.
Pressingly
awesome
steam
music is by our wonderful friend Nicholas Patel all read music is by Bill buildings. We were
edited this week by Caitlin Kenney Annie restaurants are and Alex Blumberg and produced by
for Leila Holt and Rachel Ward. We were MC. By David Herman even Herman is
in fact our hero. We hope Matthew ball feels better soon.
Emma Jacobs Andrew Norton Jacob Cruz in the block house in Austin Texas
provided production assistance with special thanks to Steve Belkin Gary left. Mara Letterman
Conor
Henderson and Michael McCall and I want to give a shout out to our co-host Adam
McKay regulations man on winning an Oscar. That's the ultimate status by the way.
Yeah that's better than even Diamond status on
Delta You can tweet us that. Surprising show e-mail us at
surprisingly awesome at GIM Media dot com We're on Facebook and a gimlet media. Dot
com slash awesome.
Surprisingly awesome is a production of human media. I'm John Hodgman I'm a
medallion eat it suckers.
Thanks to our sponsor Squarespace the easiest way to create a beautiful website portfolio
or online store when you decide to sign up for Squarespace make sure to use the offer
code awesome to get ten percent off your first purchase and to show your support for our
show Squarespace build it beautiful.
Thanks to our sponsor Ford Motor Company where Ford engineers bring new and innovative ideas
to life every day go to ford dot com to learn more.
So we've been on hold I think now for about a
minute I started a timer.
Thirty four seconds ago and it says thirty four seconds.
Once your advantage account number or say I don't have
one D. That number is c No
my mistake once your advantage account number. D That number is
he no Dixon sorry that number is P
No sorry I'm still having trouble recognize a disadvantage.
Once your advantage account number or say I don't have one
D.C. That number
is a
general.